Added notion of congruence, graph isomorphism and trace equivalence (#3)
dorchard/co661-notes: ccs-notes.tex

\fi

\section{Equivalence of Processes}
In Milner’s CCS calculus, the notion of equivalence captures when two processes
should be regarded as ``the same'' despite having different syntactic
presentations. Several approaches exist, however, it is important that whatever

> notion of equivalence we choose this has to be a \emph{congruence} with respect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
notion of equivalence we choose should be a \emph{congruence} with respect
```

to the constructors of the language.

> To give an idea of what this means imagine that you have a program written in some imperative language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give some idea of what this means, imagine that you have the following function written in some imperative language:
```

\[

>   f(x) \eqdef m := x; \texttt{ return } (x + 1);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  f(x) \eqdef\ m := x; \texttt{ return } (x + 1);
```

  % \mathrm{ then  } m := m - 1; return (x + 1) \mathrm{ else }
  % 0
\]

> This program is not (and should not) be equivalent to the program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function is not (and should not) be considered equivalent to the function
```

$inc(x) = \texttt{return } (x + 1);$.  The reason is the following. Say that you have a

> program $\mathbb{C}(g)$ which relies on a function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
program $\mathbb{C}[g]$ which comprises a program $\mathbb{C}$ which depends on a function
```

$g : \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ to calculate the increment of a natural number.
We notice that there exists a program $\mathbb{C}$ such that if we give it the

> increment function it will work correctly and if we give it the function $f$ it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
increment function (i.e., $\mathbb{C}[\lambda x . x + 1]$) it will work correctly but if we give it the function $f$ it
```

will crash.

This program can be defined as
\begin{align*}

>   \mathbb{C}[g] \eqdef \;& m := 0; \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \mathbb{C}(g) \eqdef \;& m := 0; \\
```
(consistency of notation)

                       & g (1); \\
                       & \texttt{if } m != 0 \texttt{ then } crash \texttt{ else } \texttt{return } ok
\end{align*}

> This is a toy example to illustrate a broader problem with the choice of our equivalence relation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key issues is that the mutable variable $m$ is in the scope of the parameter function $g$ and the previous definition $f$ makes use of $m$; the definition of $f$ affects its context.
```
Repeated sentence, so I've replaced with a little more explanation.

This toy example illustrates a broader issue with how we choose our equivalence
relation. A more realistic scenario involves a program $\mathbb{C}$ that depends
on an interface for sorting an array. Whether $\mathbb{C}$ can distinguish
between two implementations of this interface depends on their behaviour. If the
implementation is \emph{quicksort} or \emph{bubblesort}, then $\mathbb{C}$
cannot tell the difference---the input/output behaviour of the two functions is
the same.  But if the interface is implemented incorrectly, for example as the
identity function on arrays, then $\mathbb{C}$ will begin to behave incorrectly
as it assumes the output of the function will be an ordered array. In this case
the choice of implementation becomes observable, revealing that the equivalence
relation must be sensitive enough to detect such behavioural differences.

> Naturally, depending on the language we choose to model we need to take care of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Naturally, depending on the language we choose to model, we must take care of
```

different behaviors.

The moral here is that an equivalence relation should be a \emph{congruence} in
the sense that if two programs $P,Q$ are equivalent, written $P \approx Q$ then
for all contexts $\mathbb{C}$, also $\mathbb{C}[P] \approx \mathbb{C}[Q]$.

For example, in CCS, it must be true that for all $P \approx Q$, then

> $(P \parallel R) \approx (P \parallel R)$ where the context here is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$(P \mid R) \approx (P \mid R)$ where the context here is
```
(consistency with the rest of the document)

> $\mathbb{C}[X] = X \parallel R$. With this in mind we now go through various

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\mathbb{C}[X] = X \mid R$. With this in mind we now go through various
```

structural congruence, as it abstracts away from the precise arrangement of
states and only records sequences of visible actions.

Now consider the following example.
\begin{example}
Consider the two CCS processes
\[
P' = a.(b+c) \quad \text{and} \quad Q' = a.b + a.c.
\]
The process $P'$ performs the action $a$ first and then makes an internal choice
between $b$ and $c$, while $Q'$ makes the choice between $a.b$ and $a.c$
immediately. Computing the traces, we see that for $P'$ the possible sequences
of visible actions are: doing nothing $\varepsilon$, performing only $a$,
performing $a$ then $b$, and performing $a$ then $c$, giving
\[
\Traces(P') = \{\varepsilon, a, ab, ac\}.
\]
For $Q'$, the choice occurs before $a$, but the observable sequences of visible
actions are identical: doing nothing $\varepsilon$, performing $a$ alone, then
$a$ followed by $b$, and $a$ followed by $c$, yielding
\[
\Traces(Q') = \{\varepsilon, a, ab, ac\}.
\]
Hence, although the internal branching structure of the two processes differs,
the sets of traces are the same, and therefore $P'$ and $Q'$ are
\emph{trace-equivalent}.
\end{example}

The problem with this example, is that while the process

> $(P' || \overline{a}.\overline{b})$ can synchronise with $a$ and then $b$, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$(P' \mid \overline{a}.\overline{b})$ can synchronise with $a$ and then $b$, the
```

> process $(Q' \parallel \overline{a}.\overline{b})$ might deadlock in case $Q'$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process $(Q' \mid \overline{a}.\overline{b})$ might deadlock in case $Q'$
```

decides to to choose to branch right. Hence the context

> $\mathbb{C}[\cdot] = [\cdot] \parallel \overline{a}.\overline{b}.0$ can tell the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\mathbb{C}[\cdot] = [\cdot] \mid \overline{a}.\overline{b}.0$ can tell the
```

\begin{center}
\begin{tikzpicture}[->, >=stealth, node distance=2cm]

%------------------ P ------------------
\node[circle, draw, minimum size=7mm] (P0) {$P'$};
\node[circle, draw, minimum size=7mm, right=1.5cm of P0] (P1) {$(b+c)$};
\node[circle, draw, minimum size=7mm, right=4.5cm of P0] (P2) {$0$};

\draw (P0) edge node[above] {\texttt{a}} (P1);
\draw (P1) edge[bend left=15] node[above] {\texttt{b}} (P2);
\draw (P1) edge[bend right=15] node[above] {\texttt{c}} (P2);

%------------------ Q ------------------
\node[circle, draw, minimum size=7mm, right=6cm of P0] (Q0) {$Q'$};
\node[circle, draw, minimum size=7mm, above right=0.3cm and 1cm of Q0] (Qb) {$b$};
\node[circle, draw, minimum size=7mm, below right=0.3cm and 1cm of Q0] (Qc) {$c$};
\node[circle, draw, minimum size=7mm, right=9cm of P0] (QZ) {$0$};

\draw (Q0) edge[bend left=15] node[left] {\texttt{a}} (Qb);
\draw (Q0) edge[bend right=15] node[left] {\texttt{a}} (Qc);
\draw (Qb) edge[bend left=15] node[right] {\texttt{b}} (QZ);
\draw (Qc) edge[bend right=15] node[right] {\texttt{c}} (QZ);
\end{tikzpicture}
\end{center}
hence there is no requirement for them to be graph-isomorphic under any context.

> Therefore the condition that graph isomorphisms constitute a congruence is satisfied\footnote[1]{One can easily verify that graph isomorphisms are congruences in the category of graphs}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore the condition that graph isomorphisms constitute a congruence is satisfied.\footnote[1]{One can easily verify that graph isomorphisms are congruences in the \emph{category of graphs}, though this is outside the scope of the present material.}
```

> The problem is that this notion of equivalence is so strict that it distinguishes the previous example where $P$ and $R$ were trace equivalent. These two processes continue to be trace equivalent under all contexts, but they are not graph-isomorphic as their structure does not look like to have the same shape:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem is that this notion of equivalence is so strict that it distinguishes the previous example where $P$ and $R$ were trace equivalent. These two processes continue to be trace equivalent under all contexts, but they are not graph-isomorphic as they do not have the same shape:
```

\begin{center}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[>=Stealth, node distance=12mm, every node/.style={font=\small}]
    % P
    \node (S0) [draw, rectangle, rounded corners] {$P$};
    \node (S1) [draw, rectangle, rounded corners, right=of S0] {$b.P$};
    \draw[->] (S0) to[bend left=15] node[above]{\texttt{a}} (S1);
    \draw[->] (S1) to[bend left=15] node[below]{\texttt{b}} (S0);
    % R
    \node (T0) [draw, rectangle, rounded corners, right=25mm of S1] {$R$};
    \node (T1) [draw, rectangle, rounded corners, right=of T0] {$Q$};
    \node (T2) [draw, rectangle, rounded corners, below=of T1] {$a.Q$};
    \draw[->] (T0) to node[above]{\texttt{a}} (T1);
    \draw[->] (T1) to[bend left=15] node[right]{\texttt{b}} (T2);
    \draw[->] (T2) to[bend left=15] node[left]{\texttt{a}} (T1);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{center}
  This is now a problem because these two processes really should be regarded as equivalent.

> 
>   Therefore we need something in between.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We therefore need something in between.
```

\subsection{Bisimulation}

Often we want to be able to reason about whether two processes behave in the
same way. For example, when programming, we might come up with a refactoring or
simplification which we want to ensure behaves in the same way as the old
program. Or, we might want to use one process as a specification for another,
giving a simple but inefficient definition as the specification, against which
we want to compare the complicated but efficient implementation that we use in

> production. We can describe process equivalence by comparing process behaviour:

Reviewer: Perhaps this preamble should be earlier on in the section now?
